docs: Add Python models docs (#343)
fal-ai/fal: docsite/docs/Docs/fal-cli/python-models.md

---
sidebar_position: 2
---

> # Making Python dbt models

Reviewer: I would reword this to: `Building Python dbt models`

> # Making Python dbt models

Reviewer: I would reword this to: `Building Python dbt models`

> > ⚠️ NOTE: This feature is enabled with the flag `--experimental-models`

Reviewer: > ⚠️ NOTE: This feature is enabled with the flag `--experimental-models` when running the `fal flow` command.

> > ⚠️ NOTE: This feature is enabled with the flag `--experimental-models`

Reviewer: > ⚠️ NOTE: This feature is enabled with the flag `--experimental-models` when running the `fal flow` command.

> There are some cases where a SQL transformation is either too complex or impossible. With `fal flow` you can build your dbt models in Python.

Reviewer: As of version 0.2.3, fal now supports a new building block: "Pure Python models". This new type of model allows you to represent a dbt model purely in Python code leveraging its rich ecosystem of libraries. With Python models, you can now go beyond the capabilities of SQL and build:

1) Data transformations that Python is better suited for e.g. text manipulation, leveraging external libraries.  
2) Use Data Science libraries such as sklearn, xgboost to represent ML model artifacts such as predictions as dbt models.

To achieve this, add the Python (`.py`) or [Notebook (`.ipynb`)](./notebook-files.md) files to any of your [`model-paths`](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/project-configs/model-paths) and make sure your script calls the [`write_to_model`](../../Reference/variables-and-functions.md#writetomodel-function) function _exactly once_.

> 

Author: What do you think?

> ## Dependencies

Reviewer: `Dependencies on other models`

> ## Dependencies

Reviewer: `Dependencies on other models`

> `fal` should pick up most usages of [`source`](../../Reference/variables-and-functions.md#source-function) or [`ref`](../../Reference/variables-and-functions.md#ref-function) functions and generate the appropriate dependency for the `dbt` DAG. In case a dependency is not being picked up by `fal`, you can specify them in the top of the Python file in the [module docstring](https://peps.python.org/pep-0257/):

Reviewer: `fal` will resolve any usage of [`source`](../../Reference/variables-and-functions.md#source-function) or [`ref`](../../Reference/variables-and-functions.md#ref-function) functions and generate the appropriate dependencies for the `dbt` DAG. In case a dependency is not being picked up by `fal`, you can specify it on top of the Python file in the [module docstring](https://peps.python.org/pep-0257/):

> `fal` should pick up most usages of [`source`](../../Reference/variables-and-functions.md#source-function) or [`ref`](../../Reference/variables-and-functions.md#ref-function) functions and generate the appropriate dependency for the `dbt` DAG. In case a dependency is not being picked up by `fal`, you can specify them in the top of the Python file in the [module docstring](https://peps.python.org/pep-0257/):

Reviewer: `fal` will resolve any usage of [`source`](../../Reference/variables-and-functions.md#source-function) or [`ref`](../../Reference/variables-and-functions.md#ref-function) functions and generate the appropriate dependencies for the `dbt` DAG. In case a dependency is not being picked up by `fal`, you can specify it on top of the Python file in the [module docstring](https://peps.python.org/pep-0257/):

```py
"""Generates Python model with forecast data

For fal to pick up these dependencies:
- ref('model_a')
- source('database_b', 'table_b')
"""

from prophey import Prophet

# fal will pick up this dependency
df_c = ref('model_c')

# calculate dataframe
df = some_calc(df_c)

write_to_model(df)
```

> ## Generated files

Reviewer: I would call this `Under the hood`

Author: We may even need to add some logs about that...

Reviewer: Sure thing. I was just referring to what the title should read. This is more of an "Advanced Section". We mention that there are generated files in the paragraph itself.

> ## Generated files

Reviewer: I would call this `Under the hood`

> When running `fal flow run --experimental-models`, it will automatically generate a sql file for each Python file found. This is so `dbt` _knows_ about the Python model, which enables using the Python model downstream back in `dbt`. 

Reviewer: When running `fal flow run --experimental-models`, fal automatically generates a SQL file for each Python model. This is done in order to let `dbt` know about the existence of the Python model. This enables some nice properties such as Python models being available in dbt docs, and the ability to refer to Python models from other dbt models.

These generated files should not be modified directly by the user. They will look like this:
```sql
{{ config(materialized='ephemeral') }}
/*
FAL_GENERATED f3d686c040e94a5b33aa082f0ddcd6d3

Script dependencies:

{{ ref('model_a') }}
{{ source('database_b', 'table_b') }}
{{ ref('model_c') }}

*/

SELECT * FROM {{ target.schema }}.{{ model.name }}
```

> And the `FAL_GENERATED <checksum>` line is to check we are not overwritting any user files.

Reviewer: The `FAL_GENERATED <checksum>` line is to make sure that the file is not being modified.

---
sidebar_position: 2
---

# Creating Python dbt models

> ⚠️ NOTE: This feature is enabled with the flag `--experimental-models` when running the `fal flow run` command.

> As of version `0.3.0`, fal now supports a new building block: _Pure Python models_. This new type of model allows you to represent a `dbt` model purely in Python code leveraging its rich ecosystem of libraries. With Python models, you can now go beyond the capabilities of SQL and build:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As of version `0.3.0`, fal supports a new building block: _Pure Python models_. This type of model allows you to represent Python code as `dbt` model, thereby leveraging its rich ecosystem of libraries. With Python models, you can build:
```

> 1. Data transformations that Python is better suited for e.g. text manipulation, leveraging external libraries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Data transformations that Python is better suited for, e.g. text manipulation, leveraging external Python modules.
```

> 2. Use Data Science libraries such as sklearn, xgboost to represent ML model artifacts such as predictions as dbt models.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. ML models as dbt models by using Data Science libraries such as sklearn and xgboost.
```

> There are some cases where a SQL transformation is either too complex or impossible. With `fal flow` you can build your dbt models in Python.

Reviewer 2: This paragraph can be part of the first paragraph.

To create a Python model, create a Python (`.py`) or [Notebook (`.ipynb`)](./notebook-files.md) file in your [`model-paths`](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/project-configs/model-paths) and make sure your file calls the [`write_to_model`](../../Reference/variables-and-functions.md#writetomodel-function) function _exactly once_.

```py
df = ref('model_a')
df['col'] = 1

# write to data warehouse
write_to_model(df)
```

## Dependencies on other models

`fal` will resolve any usage of [`source`](../../Reference/variables-and-functions.md#source-function) or [`ref`](../../Reference/variables-and-functions.md#ref-function) functions and generate the appropriate dependencies for the `dbt` DAG.

> Certain complex expressions in the Python AST may not be picked up by `fal`. In that case you can specify the dependencies in the top of the Python as a [module docstring](https://peps.python.org/pep-0257/):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Certain complex expressions in the Python AST may not be picked up by `fal`. In that case you can specify dependencies in top of the Python as a [module docstring](https://peps.python.org/pep-0257/):
```

```py
"""Generates Python model with forecast data

For fal to pick up these dependencies:
- ref('model_a')
- source('database_b', 'table_b')
"""

> from prophet import Prophet

Reviewer 2: Why are we importing prophet?

Author: just an example

# fal will pick up this dependency
df_c = ref('model_c')

# calculate dataframe
df = some_calc(df_c)

# write to data warehouse
write_to_model(df)
```

## Under the hood

> When running `fal flow run --experimental-models`, `fal` will automatically generate an [ephemeral dbt model](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/building-a-dbt-project/building-models/materializations/#ephemeral) for each Python model. This is done in order to let `dbt` know about the existence of the Python model. This enables some nice properties such as Python models being available in `dbt` docs, and the ability to refer to (`ref`) Python models from other dbt models.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When running `fal flow run --experimental-models`, `fal` will automatically generate an [ephemeral dbt model](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/building-a-dbt-project/building-models/materializations/#ephemeral) for each Python model. This is done in order to let `dbt` know about the existence of a Python model. This enables some nice properties such as Python models being available in `dbt` docs, and the ability to refer to Python models from other dbt models by using `ref`.
```

> ❗️ NOTE: Generated files should be committed to your repository.

> These generated files should not be modified directly by the user. They will look like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These generated files should not be modified directly by the user. They will look somewhat like this:
```

```sql
{{ config(materialized='ephemeral') }}
/*
FAL_GENERATED f3d686c040e94a5b33aa082f0ddcd6d3

Script dependencies:

{{ ref('model_a') }}
{{ source('database_b', 'table_b') }}
{{ ref('model_c') }}

*/

SELECT * FROM {{ target.schema }}.{{ model.name }}
```

> The `FAL_GENERATED <checksum>` line is to make sure that the file is not being directly modified.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `FAL_GENERATED <checksum>` line is there to make sure that the file is not being directly modified.
```
